Natural language processing(NLP) is a subfield ofcomputer scienceand especiallyartificial intelligence. It is primarily concerned with providing computers with the ability to process data encoded innatural languageand is thus closely related toinformation retrieval,knowledge representationandcomputational linguistics, a subfield oflinguistics.

Major tasks in natural language processing arespeech recognition,text classification,natural-language understanding, andnatural-language generation.

Natural language processing has its roots in the 1950s.[1]Already in 1950,Alan Turingpublished an article titled "Computing Machinery and Intelligence" which proposed what is now called theTuring testas a criterion of intelligence, though at the time that was not articulated as a problem separate from artificial intelligence. The proposed test includes a task that involves the automated interpretation and generation of natural language.

The premise of symbolic NLP is well-summarized byJohn Searle'sChinese roomexperiment: Given a collection of rules (e.g., a Chinese phrasebook, with questions and matching answers), the computer emulates natural language understanding (or other NLP tasks) by applying those rules to the data it confronts.

Up until the 1980s, most natural language processing systems were based on complex sets of hand-written rules.  Starting in the late 1980s, however, there was a revolution in natural language processing with the introduction ofmachine learningalgorithms for language processing.  This was due to both the steady increase in computational power (seeMoore's law) and the gradual lessening of the dominance ofChomskyantheories of linguistics (e.g.transformational grammar), whose theoretical underpinnings discouraged the sort ofcorpus linguisticsthat underlies the machine-learning approach to language processing.[8]

Symbolic approach, i.e., the hand-coding of a set of rules for manipulating symbols, coupled with a dictionary lookup, was historically the first approach used both by AI in general and by NLP in particular:[18][19]such as by writing grammars or devising heuristic rules forstemming.

Machine learningapproaches, which include both statistical and neural networks, on the other hand, have many advantages over the symbolic approach:

Rule-based systems are commonly used:

In the late 1980s and mid-1990s, the statistical approach ended a period ofAI winter, which was caused by the inefficiencies of the rule-based approaches.[20][21]

The earliestdecision trees, producing systems of hardif–then rules, were still very similar to the old rule-based approaches.
Only the introduction of hiddenMarkov models, applied to part-of-speech tagging, announced the end of the old rule-based approach.

A major drawback of statistical methods is that they require elaboratefeature engineering. Since 2015,[22]the statistical approach has been replaced by theneural networksapproach, usingsemantic networks[23]andword embeddingsto capture semantic properties of words.

Intermediate tasks (e.g., part-of-speech tagging and dependency parsing) are not needed anymore.

Neural machine translation, based on then-newly inventedsequence-to-sequencetransformations, made obsolete the intermediate steps, such as word alignment, previously necessary forstatistical machine translation.

The following is a list of some of the most commonly researched tasks in natural language processing. Some of these tasks have direct real-world applications, while others more commonly serve as subtasks that are used to aid in solving larger tasks.

Though natural language processing tasks are closely intertwined, they can be subdivided into categories for convenience. A coarse division is given below.

Based on long-standing trends in the field, it is possible to extrapolate future directions of NLP. As of 2020, three trends among the topics of the long-standing series of CoNLL Shared Tasks can be observed:[46]

Most higher-level NLP applications involve aspects that emulate intelligent behaviour and apparent comprehension of natural language. More broadly speaking, the technical operationalization of increasingly advanced aspects of cognitive behaviour represents one of the developmental trajectories of NLP (see trends among CoNLL shared tasks above).

Cognitionrefers to "the mental action or process of acquiring knowledge and understanding through thought, experience, and the senses."[47]Cognitive scienceis the interdisciplinary, scientific study of the mind and its processes.[48]Cognitive linguisticsis an interdisciplinary branch of linguistics, combining knowledge and research from both psychology and linguistics.[49]Especially during the age ofsymbolic NLP, the area of computational linguistics maintained strong ties with cognitive studies.

As an example,George Lakoffoffers a methodology to build natural language processing (NLP) algorithms through the perspective of cognitive science, along with the findings of cognitive linguistics,[50]with two defining aspects:

Ties with cognitive linguistics are part of the historical heritage of NLP, but they have been less frequently addressed since the statistical turn during the 1990s. Nevertheless, approaches to develop cognitive models towards technically operationalizable frameworks have been pursued in the context of various frameworks, e.g., of cognitive grammar,[53]functional grammar,[54]construction grammar,[55]computational psycholinguistics and cognitive neuroscience (e.g.,ACT-R), however, with limited uptake in mainstream NLP (as measured by presence on major conferences[56]of theACL). More recently, ideas of cognitive NLP have been revived as an approach to achieveexplainability, e.g., under the notion of "cognitive AI".[57]Likewise, ideas of cognitive NLP are inherent to neural modelsmultimodalNLP (although rarely made explicit)[58]and developments inartificial intelligence, specifically tools and technologies usinglarge language modelapproaches[59]and new directions inartificial general intelligencebased on thefree energy principle[60]by British neuroscientist and theoretician at University College LondonKarl J. Friston.